The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets and Poems, by Eleanor Farjeon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Sonnets and Poems

Author: Eleanor Farjeon

Release Date: December 24, 2017 [EBook #56244]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS AND POEMS ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)











                     SONNETS AND POEMS, BY ELEANOR
                               FARJEON.




                               TO VIOLA.


    ¶ Some of these poems have appeared in The Athenæum, Blackwood’s
    Magazine, The Englishwoman, Root and Branch, The Saturday Westminster,
    and The Vineyard: by the courtesy of whose editors they are reprinted
    in this volume.




CONTENTS [Illustration: leaf]

                                                                    Page

Sonnets [Illustration: leaf]                                           7


Christmas and New Year Songs [Illustration: leaf]

Six Green Singers                                                     16

In a Far Country                                                      17

A Manger Song                                                         19

Child’s Carol                                                         20

The Mummers                                                           20

Cradle-Song for Christmas                                             21

The Moon upon her Watch-Tower                                         22

A Burying                                                             22


“Colin Clout, Come Home Again!”                                       23


Miscellaneous Poems [Illustration: leaf]

Bronwen of the Flowers                                                28

Jessica Dances                                                        28

Sylvia Sings                                                          29

Myfanwy among the Leaves                                              30

For Joan                                                              31

A Child’s Fear                                                        32

A Christening                                                         32

The Singer                                                            34

The Girl with the Ball                                                35

The Story-Teller                                                      36

The Reflection                                                        37

Solitary                                                              39

Spring-Dawn                                                           39

The World’s Amazing Beauty                                            40

The White Blackbirds                                                  41

Nightingales                                                          42

Night-Piece                                                           43

Before Winter                                                         43

On the Snow                                                           44

Three Miles to Penn                                                   44

When You Say                                                          45

The Outlet                                                            45

Two Choruses from “Merlin in Broceliande”                             46

Peace                                                                 48

Now that You Too                                                      49




 SONNETS. [Illustration: leaf] I.


    Man cannot be a sophist to his heart,
    He must look nakedly on his intent,
    Expose it of all shreds of argument,
    And strip it like a slave-girl in the mart.
    What though with speckled truths and masked confessions
    He still deceives awhile the outer sense?
    At barely half his honesty’s expense
    Still earns the world’s excuse for the world’s transgressions?

    His conscience cannot play the marshland elf,
    Confusing that poor midnight wanderer,
    His soul, with floundering lights and errant gleams.
    O what damnation man would deal himself
    If meeting her beyond his uttermost dreams
    He still could face his soul and lie to her.


 II.

    O spare me from the hand of niggard love
    That grasps at interest on what it lends,
    And sets cold counsel as a guard above
    The hoard it calculates before it spends.
    Such misers of the riches of the heart
    Bear their untested treasure to the grave,
    And miss the whole, striving to save the part,
    By the bare measure they have striven to save.

    Is it for pride in saying at the end:
    See, Life! I spent not all that thou hast given--
    Lo, this and this and this I did not spend!
    I stinted earth of bliss to add to heaven.
    Alas, poor fools! life only gave ye this
    Because earth has such need of heavenly bliss.


 III.

    Once, Love, be prodigal, nor look hereafter,
    Not though experience unrolls the years
    And bids thee count the cost of golden laughter
    In the dull coinage of leaden tears.
    O perjured wisdom! half-truth hedged with lies!
    That makes a common stake of joy and pain,
    When tears are man’s most mortal certainties
    And every instant’s joy his heavenly gain.

    Ah, mystery that sowed our breath and being,
    What harvest wilt thou get of untilled powers?
    Why didst thou give us sight if not for seeing?
    Why if we dare not hear make hearing ours?
    Or why in life’s name this high passion of love
    But in life’s name its passionate height to prove?


 IV.

    Wilt thou put seals on love because men say
    Love is a thing that certain time will steal?
    As well, since night is certain after day,
    Might men their eyelids to the noontide seal.
    Nay! even though that worn-out tale were truth,
    And love, dear love, were time’s assurèd dower,
    What profit canst thou get of cheated youth
    By paying usury before his hour?

    I will not hear the sorry tune of time,
    That bitter quencher of young blessedness.
    Not to have proved young rapture is the crime,
    Unproven it will be quenched no less, no less.
    And thou wilt to the earth at last, time’s scorn,
    Relinquishing a crown thou hast not worn.


 V.

    When all is said, we can but turn our eyes
    In helplessness on the miraculous heart
    And secretly dream opportunities
    That shall its untried force in motion start;
    But life that launched and left us lets us drift,
    Our mightiest dreams still lean on circumstance,
    The essence of pain and joy is in our gift
    But not its seasons of significance.

    We cannot by the strength of our desires
    Compel our destinies; we only feel
    That in our souls imperishable fires
    Are hungry for the anvil and the steel.
    But if life brings no metal to the flame
    What shall we fashion of it in life’s name?


 VI.

    Certain among us walk in loneliness
    Along the pale unprofitable days,
    Hazarding many an unanswered guess
    At what vague purpose wastes us on our ways.
    We know that we are potent to create,
    We say, I could be such or such or such,
    And lo, indifferent death swings back the gate
    And life has never put us to the touch.

    So women with the aching will to bear
    Still to the barren grave must barren go,
    And men that might again like Titans dare
    Angelic secrets, die and nothing know.
    Alas! why were we born to woe and bliss
    If life had no more need of us than this?


 VII.

    When I see two delay their wings at heaven
    To scan the creeping audience of the earth,
    I think the angelic hosts of life must even
    Break into tears of fire or furious mirth,
    That ever spirits nearly perfected
    Should count the cost of knowing themselves sublime,
    Setting the measurable years in dread
    Against their single flash of measureless time.

    So issues strange to nature are debated,
    Woven in nets and beaten into bars,
    While nature’s issue stands unconsummated
    Upon the very boundary of the stars;
    And souls whose unity had been divine
    Sundered shrink back from God’s to man’s design.


 VIII.

    Alas, that ever life’s sleek counterfeit,
    Convention, should usurp life’s very throne,
    Setting about the bitter and the sweet
    Observances the soul disdains to own.
    It muffles up with bland expedient tongue
    The wise examination of the mind,
    Bribing the old and threatening the young
    And offering easy conduct to the blind.

    A handbook of few rules for many cases,
    One answer to more sums than it can prove,
    With prizes for apt scholars in its paces,
    A veil for knowledge and a ring for love;
    And this smooth text for any questioning heart--
    Know not, and be less than, the thing thou art.


 IX.

    Love needs not two the render it complete,
    O certainly love needs not even one!
    Sweet singing wants no listener to be sweet,
    And unseen light’s still proper to the sun.
    When sunlight falls upon unpeopled valleys
    No presence can increase or dim its fall,
    When nightingales sing in deserted alleys
    No ear can make the night more musical.

    If solitary into the light and song
    I come, I know I have my treasure whole,
    Yea, and still have it whole, although a throng
    Runs after me down paths whereby I stole,
    Yea, and still have it whole, though only one
    Should follow me--or none, beloved, or none.


 X.

    What is this anguish then that always stands
    Mingled in love, if love be love’s sole end?
    O it is life still gasping his commands
    And crying love therein to stand his friend.
    Life drives us all whether we love or no,
    We are life’s purpose, he much less is ours,
    And we like panting beasts in harness go
    While his fierce needs make torments of our powers.

    Only when love across the heavy fields
    Divinely treads to labour with the clods,
    He breaks the goad that life is glad to yield,
    And lifts the yoke that bowed us to the sods:
    Upstanding, we behold a God revealed,
    And serve life’s purpose not like beasts but gods.


 XI.

    A few of us who faltered as we fared
    Love has returned for. Still he leads us on,
    But where we walk the furrows are prepared
    And sown and fruitful, and the sowers are gone.
    O love, O love, the way too easy lies!
    Life on the rough horizon yonder goes,
    And when I call he will not turn his eyes,
    But with my brothers sows, and reaps, and sows.

    Life without love, O bitter, bitterest birth!
    Love without life still leaves us in our need.
    Ah, love, give up to me my patch of earth,
    My pinch of seed! Hast neither earth nor seed?
    Then whence these visions of thy presence born,
    These shining visions of flowers and fruit and corn?


 XII.

    I hear love answer: Since within the mesh
    Of blood and flesh you labour for awhile,
    I, even I, must use you in the flesh,
    Leavening it of all the world calls vile.
    I am not nature’s force. O, she will forge
    Her indomitable end without my aid,
    And men cry out on her with rising gorge
    As though they were of other forces made.

    Not being her bond-slave, I alone can give
    Visions that are unmingled with her earth,
    But since this present in her habit you live
    I must meet nature to fulfil their birth.
    Only when you and I come clear of the clay,
    Beloved, I will fulfil them as I may.


 XIII.

    Thy glance is lovelier than the glance of the moon,
    Thy breath more heavenly than the breath of may,
    When thou dost gaze my sight begins to swoon,
    When thou dost breathe my own breath swims away.
    O love, with strange clear light, with strange dim breath,
    Thou dost pervade me, till all strength, all sense,
    Dissolve, it may be as they will when death
    Looses the soul from the body’s impotence.

    The stones I tread no longer solid are,
    These narrow houses all are built of air,
    Nay, are they on this star, or on that star
    Distantly trembling? Am I here or there?
    Love, love, I know not what is near and far,
    I am with thee and thou art everywhere.


 XIV.

    Now I have love again and life again
    By either hand, and cannot join their palms;
    For me they never will be one but twain,
    And I from each accept the barest alms.
    Life’s dole I scatter publicly, love’s lies
    Unspent, unspent for ever in my heart--
    Poor heart, poor beggar of bleak charities
    From stores wherein it owns no proper part.

    Each knows me for his almsman in distress
    And brings his mercies to my famished door,
    But love asks not who doth my body dress,
    Nor life who stoops to clothe a heart so poor.
    Why do ye always come in singleness?
    Meet in me once, and I will want no more.


 XV.

    Farewell, you children that I might have borne.
    Now must I put you from me year by year,
    Now year by year the root of life be torn
    Out of this womb to which you were so dear,
    Now year by year the milky springs be dried
    Within the sealed-up fountains of my breast,
    Now year by year be to my arms denied
    The burden they would break with and be blessed.

    Sometimes I felt your lips and hands so close
    I almost could have plucked you from the dark,
    But now your very dream more distant grows
    As my still aching body grows more stark.
    I shall not see you laugh or hear you weep,
    Kiss you awake, or cover up your sleep.


 XVI.

    O lovely life, how you have worn me out
    With asking naught and leaving me at large,
    Till my unmeasured strength begins to doubt
    If it could answer now your lightest charge.
    I am as weary as a child to-night
    And with my heavy lack of burdens bowed,
    And power and pride have ceased to stand upright,
    Wanting the cause to be powerful and proud.

    Passion is spent, and nothing was it spent on,
    And grief run dry of having no wounds to cure,
    And discontent that was the staff I leant on
    Is stifled by its final panting breaths.
    I have only patience left: such patience, sure,
    Is not life’s child and mine, but mine and death’s.


 XVII.

    My little dream, my momentary dream,
    My illimitable dream has slipt away.
    It came not like the morning, but the gleam
    In morning’s van that is not night or day.
    But since my walls of ignorance are broken,
    Though on that desert knowledge builds no towers,
    I cannot say of life, he has not spoken,
    I cannot say of love, he has no powers.

    I have seen apparitions. I have heard
    Rumours within my soul’s profoundest cave.
    Movements remote and mighty have been stirred
    In my ancestral blood, while from the grave
    And womb of time strange thunders did arise
    That shook the throne of thought with prophecies.


 XVIII.

    Shall we not laugh together, you and I,
    I being at last fulfilled, at last at rest
    Within the strength of your beloved breast,
    Shall we not laugh once at a day gone by
    When, wan as things that lie below the earth,
    Things choked and buried, sunless and unsought,
    This richest life was only lived in thought,
    Seed without fruit, unconsummated birth?

    Love, in that time when you have called me yours
    And have with kisses long outbreathed old fears,
    Love, let me not remember these! these hours,
    Save with one smile to drown their thousand tears.
    Then fold me in your bosom so deep away
    That memory cannot touch this loveless day.




 CHRISTMAS AND NEW-YEAR SONGS. [Illustration: leaf]




 SIX GREEN SINGERS.


    The frost of the moon fell over my floor
    And six green singers stood at my door.

    “What do ye here that music make?”
    “Let us come in for Christ’s sweet Sake.”

    “Long have ye journeyed in coming here?”
    “Our Pilgrimage was the length of the year.”

    “Where do ye make for?” I asked of them.
    “Our Shrine is a Stable in Bethlehem.”

    “What will ye do as ye go along?”
    “Sing to the world an evergreen song.”

    “What will ye sing for the listening earth?”
    “One will sing of a brave-souled Mirth,

    “One of the Holiest Mystery,
    The Glory of glories shall one song be,

    “One of the Memory of things,
    One of the Child’s imaginings,

    “One of our songs is the fadeless Faith,
    And all are the Life more mighty than death.”

    “Ere ye be gone that music make,
    Give me an alms for Christ’s sweet Sake.”

    “Six green branches we leave with you;
    See they be scattered your house-place through.

    “The staunch blithe Holly your board shall grace,
    Mistletoe bless your chimney-place,

    “Laurel to crown your lighted hall,
    Over your bed let the Yew-bough fall,

    “Close by the cradle the Christmas Fir,
    For elfin dreams in its branches stir,

    “Last and loveliest, high and low,
    From ceil to floor let the Ivy go.”

    From each glad guest I received my gift
    And then the latch of my door did lift--

    “Green singers, God prosper the song ye make
    As ye sing to the world for Christ’s sweet Sake.”




 IN A FAR COUNTRY.


    Two strangers met on a mountain-side
    In a far country ...
    The moon was young, the year was old,
    The airs of the night were bitter-cold,
    And their heavy cloaks their dress did hide.

    One stranger did the other stay
    In that far country:
    “What brings you into the icy dark
    With lifted eyes that only mark
    The lights of heaven, less light than day?”

    The second said the first unto
    In the far country:
    “Many the lights of heaven are,
    But I watch for the birth of one more Star
    Not yet arisen. And what do you?”

    The first man to the other spoke
    In the far country:
    “Even as you I wait the birth
    Of one new Light above the earth.
    What garb do you wear beneath your cloak?”

    The second dropped his outer dress
    In that far country:
    He wore a sheep-skin frayed and thin
    Whose holes laid bare the shivering skin,
    And the wind made mock of his nakedness.

    The other did his robe unfold
    In that far country,
    And plain to see in the starlight dim
    Were the furs and purple that covered him,
    They were so heavy and rich with gold.

    The hand of each unto each did spring
    In that far country.
    “Brother, why dared ye the night?” “Because
    He, even as I, a Shepherd was.”
    “I came, because He was a King.”

    Handfast they watched the Birth on high
    In the far country.
    _Shepherd and King forgotten be,
    But not that all men’s Brother was He
    Who for all men did live and die
    In a far country._




 A MANGER SONG.


    Whence got ye your soft, soft eyes of the mother, O soft-eyed cow?
       [Illustration: leaf] We saw the Mother of mothers bring forth,
       and that was how. [Illustration: leaf]
       We sheltered her that was shelterless for a little while,
    We watched the milking Babe at her breast, and we saw her smile.
    Even as we she lay upon straw, and even as we
    Took her sleep in the dark of the manger unfretfully,
    And when the dawn of the strange new Star discovered her thus,
    The ray that was destined for her and for Him fell also on us;
    The light passed into her eyes and ours, and full in its flood
    We were first to behold the first mothering look of the Mother of God.




 CHILD’S CAROL


    When there dawns a certain Star
    Comes a Stranger into the city;
    The feet of prayer his dear feet are,
    His hands they are the hands of pity.

    Every houseplace rich and poor
    Shall show for welcome a sprig of green,
    And every heart shall open its door
    To let the Stranger enter in.

    I will set my door ajar
    That he may enter if he please;
    The eyes of love his dear eyes are,
    His brow it is the brow of peace.

    Through the heart of every child
    And man and woman in the city
    He shall pass, and they be filled
    With love and peace and prayer and pity.




 THE MUMMERS.


    Here’s greeting for the master,
    And for the mistress greeting,
    And greeting for each gallant lad
    And every pretty sweeting,
    And greeting for the little children
    Dancing round our meeting.

    We be your servants all,
    We be merry mummers;
    We know jolly winter’s face
    Though we ne’er saw summer’s;
    We come in wi’ the end o’ the year,
    For we be Christmas-comers.

    This here do be Saint George,
    This the heathen Paynim,
    Dragon he will drink your healths
    When Saint George has slain him,
    This do be a beautiful maid
    And a trouble ’twere to train him!

    There’s our mumming ended
    And nothing to distress ye--
    Surely, we be little loth
    Since so kindly press ye.
    Here’s God bless ye, master, mistress,
    All the house, God bless ye!




 CRADLE-SONG SONG FOR CHRISTMAS.


    Child, when on this night you lie
    Softly, undisturbedly,
    On as white a bed of down
    As any child’s in London Town,
    By a fire that all the night
    Keeps your chamber warm and light:
    Dream, if dreams are yet your law,
    Your bed of down a bed of straw,
    Only warmed and lighted by
    One star in the open sky.
    Sweet you’ll sleep then, for we know
    Once a Child slept sweetly so.




 THE MOON UPON HER WATCH-TOWER.


    The moon upon her watch-tower
    With her golden eye
    Guarded the quarters
    East and West the sky.
    Just as midnight
    Was stepping past
    One drew his first breath,
    One drew his last.
    The moon upon her watch-tower
    Rang a soundless bell--
    It might have been for welcome,
    It might have been farewell.




 A BURYING.


    I see the twelve fair months go by
    Bearing a coffin shoulder-high.
    What, laughing? Pretty pall-bearers,
    Pitiless of the buried years,
    Have ye never a tear to shed
    Nor sigh to drop for the newly-dead,
    Nor marble grief to mark his grave?--
    No, none of these; but see, we have
    Green seed to mingle with his earth.--
    What, is not this a burying?---- Nay, a birth.




 “COLIN CLOUT, COME HOME AGAIN!”


    Through the grey and heavy air,
    Through the January rain,
    When old England nipped and bare
    Shudders with the load of pain
    Wept upon her by the eyes
    Of sunless, sun-remembering skies:
    When the soul of man is fain
    Suddenly abroad to fare,
    Questing, questing everywhere
    The soul of beauty to regain,
    Dreaming like a boy to snare
    The great free bird no lure can chain,
    Following in a dull despair
    That cannot pierce their brief disguise
    Random flights of pallid lies
    Never fledged in Paradise:--
    Comes the sound of gathering cries
    Calling down the centuries
    Urgently with might and main,
    “_Colin Clout, O Colin Clout!
    Colin, Colin, Colin Clout!
    England needs you, Colin Clout!
    Colin Clout, come home again!_”

    Colin, can you never hear?
    Colin, will you never rise
    From the narrow plot of rest
    That sang for joy of such a guest
    To fill its dust with melodies,
    And to make it year by year
    Such a place of golden cheer,
    Of flowering deed and jolly jest,
    Of pastoral prettiness and the clear
    Summons to be sailing West
    Over oceans fabulous
    Leading on to stranger shores
    And distant ports adventurous--
    That with its music in your ear,
    Drawn from your own imagined stores,
    You care to give no heed to us
    Whose laughter has been soured by doubt,
    Whose hearts are hedged with many a fear,
    Who learn to hold our lives so dear
    That all their wealth has trickled out,
    Who joy and beauty hand in hand
    Have driven homeless from the land
    And put the old ideals to rout:--
    Yet even because, returning here,
    You needs must find your England thus,
    Let not her children call in vain,
    “_Colin Clout, O Colin Clout!
    Colin Clout, come home again!_”

    Hark! I hear a shepherd’s pipe
    With three notes of music wipe
    Discord from this troubled star;
    I hear tumultuous gladness shake
    The marrows of the land awake,
    Wherein old slumbering visions are;
    I hear the stirrings of a day
    When all the earth will smell of may,
    When eager men will fling aside
    Their garments of enlightened pride
    Where time the moth has had his way,
    And don again the homespun dress
    Of England’s ancient simpleness--
    O piping shepherd-reed at play,
    Blown with a poet’s golden breath,
    How suddenly a heart as gay,
    As innocent, as full of faith
    As children’s hearts are, ’gins to beat
    In the world’s bosom at my feet!
    How all my sisters’ eyes grow strong,
    And all my brothers’ eyes grow sweet,
    And we who boast so loud to-day
    Above our self-created strife
    That we have lost our fear of death
    Lose suddenly our fear of life,
    And go with gladness down the way
    To meet whatever is to meet.

    Then, Colin! then about your knees
    We’ll lie and list such fantasies
    As keep the spirit bright and young
    And guard the edge of youth as keen
    As a new-tempered virgin sword;
    We will re-learn the magic tongue,
    And where the meadow-rings are green
    Re-seek Titania and her lord,
    For you will bring a flitting home
    Of vanished Folk to English loam;
    About our business we will go
    With holiday-hearts whose dancing beat
    Is measured to your piping sweet,
    And on your music great will grow
    In the redress of antique wrongs;
    And from the richest of your songs,
    O dreamer-lover, shepherd-knight,
    Spell out a long-forgotten name,
    Re-kindling the expiring glow
    Of Chivalry’s high beacon-light,
    Till by its heaven-pointing flame
    Our generations understand
    Their England is too fair a land
    To suffer ugliness and blight
    And the dishonourable bane
    Of serfdom’s bowed and broken knee,
    Too fine a trading mart to be
    Where one may cause the many pain,
    And foul self-interest men empowers
    To turn to weeds what should be flowers.

    For evil must be still to cope
    When Colin Clout comes home again,
    Because a world devoid of pain
    Would be a world made bare of hope,
    And both must act together till
    Slipt from its spiritual trance
    This globe is frozen to good and ill;
    But ere the life here bound by chance
    Flows to its last significance,
    Colin! bring home the dream we lost
    Because we grew too old for dreams,
    And bring again the golden barque
    With which in our high-hearted youth
    We sailed wild seas and perilous streams;
    And find again a road we crossed
    In olden time and failed to mark;
    And give us love of beauty back,
    And set us on the grassy track
    Of many an ancient-simple truth;
    Re-teach our voices how to sing
    Melodiously; and bring, O bring
    The rustless lance of honour in
    For men to strive again to win,
    As in the days when knightlihood
    For life’s most high expression stood,
    And man reached forth to touch that goal
    Not with his hands but with his soul.

    Ah, Colin! ’tis a twice-told tale
    How that the woods were heard to wail,
    How birds with silence did complain,
    And fields with faded flowers did mourn,
    And flocks from feeding did refrain,
    And rivers wept for your return.
    Singer of England’s merriest hour,
    Return! return and make her flower,
    Charming your pipe unto your peers
    As once you did in other years;
    For we who wait on you, know this,
    Whatever tune your reed shall play
    Will hearken with as gladdened ears
    As Cuddy and as Thestylis,
    As Hobbinol and Lucida
    And all the simple shepherd-train,
    What time they gathered and ran, a gay
    Rejoicing happy-hearted rout,
    Across the sweetening meadow-hay
    Each calling other:
                      “_Come about!
    The time of waiting is run out,
    And Colin Clout, O, Colin Clout,
    Colin Clout’s come home again!_”




 MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. [Illustration: leaf]




 BRONWEN OF THE FLOWERS.


    Bronwen gathered wild-flowers
    Up-and-down the lane;
    Her gathering touch upon them
    Sweeter was than rain.

    Now a blossom overblown,
    Now a bud begun--
    Her eye that lightened on them
    Was quicker than the sun.

    One by one she named them,
    Oh, she did express
    In her pretty namings
    All their prettiness:

    Some were fit for virgins,
    Some for merry dames,
    And the love with which she named them
    Was lovelier than their names.




 JESSICA DANCES.


    When Joy and Molly on the lawn
    Danced bare of foot like spirits of dawn
    Jessica watched in wonderment
    Until delight would not be pent,
    And shoe and sock she cast in mirth
    And felt her naked toes touch earth.
    Swiftly the fresh green joy shot in
    Through the fresh young rosy skin,
    And in a golden glee the child
    Went dancing innocently-wild
    Up and down and round and round
    Like daisies covering the ground,
    Called sunward by the age-long spell
    No ages can destroy
    Of youth that never sighed or sinned,--
    While elfin Molly and fairy Joy
    Danced on like lilies in a dell
    Or harebells in the wind.




 SYLVIA SINGS.


    Sylvia said that day,
    “I’ll sing if you will play.”
    We could deny not anything,
    Not even deny to hear her sing
    Who like a little spirit lay
    Uncertain whether to flutter its wing,
    To go or stay.

    So though it broke our hearts for pity,
    With hidden face one went
    To the tinkling instrument,
    And one with bended head
    Stayed by the bed,
    While the small voice sang over and over its ditty:--

    “‘_Manners make ladies, but not such as these,
    Manners make ladies, but not such as these._’
    Now again, please!
    ‘_Manners make ladies--
    But not such as these._’”

    She breathed it long and long
    And ah, so low,
    Her tiny meaningless song,
    For she was pleased to please us so--
    But what we said
    Sitting beside her bed
    I do not know,
    There were so many tears to keep unshed.




 MYFANWY AMONG THE LEAVES.


    Dying leaf and dead leaf,
    Yellow leaf and red leaf
    And white-backed beam,
    Lay along the woodland road
    As quiet as a dream.

    Summer was over,
    The year had lost her lover,
    Spent with her grief
    All along the woodland road
    Leaf fell on leaf.

    Then came a shuffling,
    Such a happy ruffling
    Of the dried sweet
    Surf of leaves upon the road
    Round a baby’s feet.

    Year-old leaf ran after
    Three-year-old laughter,
    Danced through the air
    As she caught them from the road
    And flung them anywhere.

    Old leaf and cold leaf,
    Brown leaf and gold leaf
    And white-backed beam,
    Followed down the woodland road
    Myfanwy in a dream.




 FOR JOAN.


    I shall love no other child,
    Joan, as I love you;
    The second life our children build
    Remains for you to do.

    You would have been out-loved in one
    That never will be born,
    And the love that should my flower have grown
    Grows nothing but my thorn.

    You for that unborn other’s sake
    My deepest heart do clutch,
    But sometimes--sometimes all you take
    Hurts, for her sake, too much.




 A CHILD’S FEAR.


    “Come to your poor old Mother,” she said
    Smiling, and gathered to her breast
    With her good hands her baby’s head;
    But the child’s eyes looked out oppressed.
    “_Not_ old--_not_ old--it isn’t true!
    Everyone may be old but you.”

    Old?--Old, you see, is much too near
    The half-imagined thing that takes
    Our Mothers where they do not hear
    Even when their baby wakes
    And cries for comfort in the gloom--
    Babies to cry, and Mothers not come!

    Within the safe arms round her curled,
    “Oh,” she half sobbed, “I wish you’d be
    The youngest person in the world--
    How old are you? not _old_?” begged she,
    And caught a little panting breath,
    Then lay quite still and thought of death.




 A CHRISTENING.


    This day we are met to set a name
    On thy mysterious dust and flame,
    That in the years to follow, when
    Thy feet shall walk the ways of men,
    Thou mayst according to his plan
    Be known thereby to man.

    O being undiscoverable!
    Thy name thyself will never spell.
    Whate’er thou art, whate’er wilt be,
    Man’s tongue will never utter thee;
    Towering upon thy inmost throne
    Thou shalt of none be known.

    We watch in wonder how thy brow
    Grows strange and silent in sleep, and how
    Even more silent and more strange
    Thy waking is that brings no change
    When thy dim dreams of slumber press
    To dimmer dreamlessness.

    But looking with a love that seems
    To pierce thy undiscovered dreams,
    Within thy small unfolded being
    Some dream of our own making seeing,
    “All that she feels and dreams,” we say,
    “We too will know one day.”

    Ah, even when human speech has come
    To make thy mouth no longer dumb,
    When quickened thought and sympathy
    Like angels look from either eye,
    Thyself will still be hidden as deep
    As now, awake, asleep.

    We must our knowledge of thee still
    By nothing save by love fulfil,
    And with the dreamings of the heart
    Still guess at the dream of what thou art
    Which only of thee and God is known,
    Child whom this day names Joan.




 THE SINGER.


    I had a holy hour last night.
    The room her presence made so pure
    Was shaded in uncertain light,
    But oh, the light it held was sure.

    There while about her golden head
    The shadows and the low light played,
    She eagerly and softly read
    The shining songs her soul had made.

    Flower and shell and sand and sea,
    And flight of gulls against the sun,
    And many a friend, and many a tree,
    And youth begun and age nigh-done,

    Death and life, and life and death,
    Divinely in her vision smiled;
    She spoke them with the silver breath
    Half of angel, half of child.

    Upon her bed I lay at rest,
    But once when kneeling by her chair
    I leaned my head beside her breast
    And heard the wordless singing there.




 THE GIRL WITH THE BALL.


    She ran with her ball in her light dress floating and free,
      [Illustration: leaf] Tossing it, tossing it up in the evening light,
      [Illustration: leaf] She ran with her ball at the edge of the outgoing
      sea [Illustration: leaf] On sand which the dropping sun turned bright.

    Over the sea hung birds more white than the skin
    Of the last few swimmers who took the waves with their breasts;
    The birds dipped straight as her ball when a silver fin
    Glanced in the shallow crests.

    She ran so swift, and suddenly stopped as swift
    To look at a shell, or splash up a pool in rain;
    Wind blew, and she in the wind began to drift
    Foam-like, and suddenly ran again.

    Children who played on the shore in the last of the day
    Paused and watched in wonder her rise and fall
    Like elders watching a child: she was younger than they
    As she ran by the sea with her ball.

    Her hair was loose and she had no shoes on her feet,
    And her image ran under her feet on the wet gold shore,
    She threw up her ball and she caught it, and once laughed sweet
    As though the world had never heard laughter before.




 THE STORY-TELLER.


    Over the hearth on which we burned
    Brown beech-nuts, lichen-twigs, and cones,
    I sat beside her while she turned
    A forkèd wand within the pyre,
    Until two little spirts of fire
    Sprang from the hazel’s withered bones.

    Then, with her eyes upon her branch
    Pointed with ruddy nuts of flame,
    Like one who has no power to staunch
    The heart’s-blood flowing from his side,
    She through her mouth undammed a tide
    Of legends that I could not name:--

    Strange villages where damsels fished
    For lovers in a rainbow sea
    By night: a crazy man who wished
    To act like God, and very soon
    Out-freaked the fools that raked the moon:
    Gold underneath an apple-tree

    Discovered by a thrice-dreamed dream:
    Half-tales, half-ballads--until the room
    Shook in its shadows with a stream
    Of pedlars, witches, cats in crowns,
    Denizens of enchanted towns,
    And kings confined in forests of gloom.

    Her voice went up and down like wind
    That wanders lost among the eaves;
    The flamelets on her hazel thinned
    And dwindled into smouldering eyes;
    Her voice failed like the wind that dies,
    She threw a handful of black leaves

    On the bright litter of the hearth
    And thrust her hazel’s double spark
    Within. The smell of smoking earth
    Rose from the stones where ceased to burn
    The fiery lines of cone and fern
    And berry: the room was dumb and dark.




 THE REFLECTION.


    She had no life except to be what men
    Required of her to be.
    They came for sympathy, and came again
    For sympathy.

    She never knew the way her heart to spare
    When they were hurt or worn,
    Whatever one may for another bear
    By her was borne.

    They said, you give us of yourself so much!
    She heard them with a smile,
    Knowing she only gave to such and such
    Themselves awhile.

    Their interests, their frets, their loneliness,
    Their sorrows and despairs,
    She wore for them--they saw her in no dress
    That was not theirs.

    She learned to understand the solitudes
    When she by none was sought;
    Men of themselves grow sick, and in those moods
    Needed her not,

    Getting relief of others who gave things
    By their own purpose lit;
    If she too had some freshness in her springs,
    None wanted it.

    She grew accustomed to be quietly shut
    Away, was used to see
    Love limping dutifully in a rut
    That once ran free;

    She knew the signs when friends began to cast
    What they had asked her for--
    Some asked for much, some little, all at last
    Asked nothing more.

    And when she died they sorrowed, it is true,
    But not for long, because
    They had seen some pale reflection that she threw,
    Not what she was.




 SOLITARY.


    He moved his fellow-men among
    And changed with them some forms of speech.
    His heart was separate from his tongue,
    They would not hear his heart beseech.

    Their needs were very like his own,
    Quivering in bodies numb and dazed;
    They smiled and talked and felt alone.--
    Did not their hearts look on amazed?




 SPRING-DAWN.


    Heaven, the Spring’s coming true again!
    Easterly over the sky’s spring-blue again
    Passes a pearly flight of cloud--
    Somewhere a dovecote is empty, surely!
    And all of its birds have flown in a brood
    Over the pure blue purely!

    Westerly owl-grey gatherings
    Linger a little yet:
    Soon, owls! soon you will shrink
    Out of the sun, I think,
    Who even now turns silver-wet
    The last of your ghostly gatherings.

    Back to your windy barns again,
    To your forsaken granaries,
    Haunting, hating breed of the Winter!
    For the grass in the mould begins to teem,
    By every gate where the cuckoo flies
    Primrose and fragile wind-flower enter,
    And, lovelier truth than any dream,
    Blue light is mirrored in ancient tarns again!




 THE WORLD’S AMAZING BEAUTY.


    The world’s amazing beauty would make us cry
    Aloud; but something in it strikes us dumb.
    Beech-forests drenched in sunny floods
    Where shaking rays and shadows hum,
    The unrepeated aspects of the sky,
    Clouds in their lightest and their wildest moods,
    Bare shapes of hills, June grass in flower,
    The sea in every hour,
    Slopes that one January morning flow
    Unbrokenly with snow,
    Peaks piercing heaven with motions sharp and harsh,
    Slow-moving flats, grey reed and silver marsh,
    A flock of swans in flight
    Or solitary heron flapping home,
    Orchards of pear and cherry turning white,
    Low apple-trees with rosy-budded boughs,
    Streams where young willows drink and cows,
    Earth’s rich ploughed loam
    Thinking darkly forward to her sheaves,
    Water in Autumn spotted with yellow leaves,
    Light running overland,
    Gulls standing still above their images
    On strips of shining sand
    While evening in a haze of green
    Half-hides
    The calm receding tides--
    What in the beauty we have seen in these
    Keeps us still silent? something we have not seen?




 THE WHITE BLACKBIRDS.


    Among the stripped and sooty twigs of the wild cherry tree
       [Illustration: leaf] Sometimes they flit and swing as though two
       blossoms of the Spring [Illustration: leaf]
       Had quickened on these bleak October branches suddenly.

    They are like fairy birds flown down from skies which no one knows,
    Their pointed yellow bills are bright as April daffodils,
    Their plumy whiteness heavenly as January snows.

    Loveliest guests that choose our garden-plot for loitering!
    Oh, what a sudden flower of joy is set upon the hour
    When in their cherry cages two white blackbirds sit and swing.




 NIGHTINGALES.


    The nightingales around our house
    Among the lovely orchard boughs:
    Where the young apple-dawn too soon
    Turns whiter than the daylit moon,
    And ’mid its shadowy silver bowers
    The quince is flushed with heavenly flowers
    That opening poise as though for flight:
    The nightingales sing day and night,
    With piercing, long, insistent calling,
    And chuckle of sweet waters falling,
    And unimaginable trill
    That makes my heart beat and stand still.

    Oh, even so, by night and day
    When first the earth broke into May
    Ere men shut thunder up in shells,
    They came and sang their miracles;
    And so, in myriad Mays to come,
    When all those damnèd storms are dumb
    And only heaven’s lightning crowns
    Her clouds of thunder on the Downs,
    They still will come, by night and day
    To sing the radiant Spring away,
    Till men lie crumbled with their towns
    And earth no more breaks into May.




 NIGHT-PIECE.


    Now independent, beautiful and proud,
    Out of the vanishing body of a cloud
    Like its arisen soul the full moon swims
    Over the sea, into whose distant brims
    Has flowed the last of the light. I am alone.
    Even the diving gannet now is flown
    From these unpeopled sands. A mist lies cold
    Upon the muffled boundaries of the world.
    The lovely earth whose silence is so deep
    Is folded up in night, but not in sleep.




 BEFORE WINTER.


    The day is gone of the sun and the swallow
    And the glory on the trees:
    Before the gale the length of the pave
    The dry old corpse of a plane-leaf flees,
    And its step is harsh and hollow
    As it chatters into its grave.

    The shivering dawn now hides and slouches
    Long in the cover of dark,
    Till up the sky, like a murderer pale,
    He drags at last a dull red mark,
    And the hound of the grey wind crouches
    And pants on his rusty trail.




 ON THE SNOW.


    I knew no woman, child, or man
    Had been before my steps to-day.
    By Dippel Woods the snow-lanes ran
    Soft and uncrushed above their clay;
    But little starry feet had traced
    Their passages as though in words,
    And all those lanes of snow were laced
    With runnings of departed birds.




 THREE MILES TO PENN.


    To-day I walked three miles to Penn
    With an uneasy mind.
    The sun shone like a frozen eye,
    A light that had gone blind,
    The glassy air between the sky
    And earth was frozen wind--
    All motion and all light again
    Were closed within a rind,
    As I by wood and field to Penn
    Took trouble in my mind.

    The slopes of cloud in heaven that lay,
    Unpeopled hills grown old,
    Had no more movement than the land
    Locked in a flowing mould;
    The sheep like mounds of cloudy sand
    Stood soundless in the cold;
    There was no stir on all the way
    Save what my heart did hold,
    So quiet earth and heaven lay,
    So quiet and so old.




 WHEN YOU SAY.


    When you say, I still am young,
    You are young no more;
    When, I’m old, is on your tongue,
    Age is still in store.

    Youth and age will never grope
    To say what they may be:
    One only knows it has a hope,
    And one a certainty.




 THE OUTLET.


    Grief struck me. I so shook in heart and wit
    I thought I must speak of it or die of it.

    A certain friend I had with strength to lend,
    When mine was spent I went to find my friend,

    Who, rising up with eyes wild for relief,
    Hung on my neck and spoke to me of grief.

    I raked the ashes of my burned-out strength
    And found one coal to warm her with at length.

    I sat with her till I was icy cold.
    At last I went away, my grief untold.




 TWO CHORUSES FROM “MERLIN IN BROCELIANDE.”


 I.

    Life, what art thou? Springing water art
    thou: [Illustration: leaf] When the waters flash and spring,
    life, start thou!

    When the spirit burns within the chapels
    The stones are quick with faith.
    When the branch hangs out its reddened apples
    The tree is strong with breath;
    When love’s womb conceives the stirring blossom
    The heart is full of power;
    When youth leaps in the darkness of the bosom
    The body is in flower.
    When the fiery spirit deserts the chapels,
    Bury religion’s corse;
    When the branch no more puts forth its apples,
    Fell the tree at the source;
    When love feeds itself and not its blossom
    The heart’s core withereth;
    When youth makes no movement in the bosom
    The body is signed to death.

    Life, what art thou? A golden fountain art thou:
    When the fountain springs not, life, depart thou!


 II.

 _First Voices._

    Saw ye the stars last night, all still,
    Remote, and bitter-cold,
    Who were too passionless to thrill,
    Being so wise and old?

 _Second Voices._

    O saw ye not one star alight,
    A leap of silver fire,
    Did ye not see it sear the night
    And die of its own desire?

 _First Voices._

    Saw ye the ancient stars look on
    Locked in a chilly dream
    Which banished the awakened one
    Beyond their frozen scheme?

 _Second Voices._

    O saw ye not the ashen band
    Fade in the morning-gold,
    Who long had ceased to understand,
    Being so bitter-old?

 _All the Voices._

    Ye petrified on heavenly thrones,
    Was there not chaos once?
    Ye did not keep your ordered zones
    When ye were raging suns!

    Once flaming rivers were your breath
    And the wild hairs of your brow--
    Once ye were life, once ye were death!
    Ye are not either now.




 PEACE.


 I.

    I am as awful as my brother War,
    I am the sudden silence after clamour.
    I am the face that shows the seamy scar
    When blood has lost its frenzy and its glamour.
    Men in my pause shall know the cost at last
    That is not to be paid in triumphs or tears,
    Men will begin to judge the thing that’s past
    As men will judge it in a hundred years.

    Nations! whose ravenous engines must be fed
    Endlessly with the father and the son,
    My naked light upon your darkness, dread!--
    By which ye shall behold what ye have done:
    Whereon, more like a vulture than a dove,
    Ye set my seal in hatred, not in love.


 II.

    Let no man call me good. I am not blest.
    My single virtue is the end of crimes,
    I only am the period of unrest,
    The ceasing of the horrors of the times;
    My good is but the negative of ill,
    Such ill as bends the spirit with despair,
    Such ill as makes the nations’ soul stand still
    And freeze to stone beneath its Gorgon glare.

    Be blunt, and say that peace is but a state
    Wherein the active soul is free to move,
    And nations only show as mean or great
    According to the spirit then they prove.--
    O which of ye whose battle-cry is Hate
    Will first in peace dare shout the name of Love?




 NOW THAT YOU TOO [Illustration: leaf]


    Now that you too must shortly go the way
    Which in these bloodshot years uncounted men
    Have gone in vanishing armies day by day,
    And in their numbers will not come again:
    I must not strain the moments of our meeting
    Striving each look, each accent, not to miss,
    Or question of our parting and our greeting,
    Is this the last of all? is this--or this?

    Last sight of all it may be with these eyes,
    Last touch, last hearing, since eyes, hands, and ears,
    Even serving love, are our mortalities,
    And cling to what they own in mortal fears:--
    But oh, let end what will, I hold you fast
    By immortal love, which has no first or last.

 [Illustration: B. H. BLACKWELL, OXFORD.]

    THIS SECOND OF THE INITIATES SERIES OF
    POETRY BY PROVED HANDS, WAS PRINTED
    IN OXFORD AT THE VINCENT WORKS,
    AND FINISHED IN APRIL, MCMXVIII. [Illustration: leaf]
    PUBLISHED BY B. H. BLACKWELL, BROAD
    STREET, OXFORD, AND SOLD IN AMERICA
    BY LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., NEW YORK.

     INITIATES [Illustration: leaf] A SERIES OF POETRY BY PROVED HANDS
     [Illustration: leaf] UNIFORM VOLUMES IN DOLPHIN OLD STYLE TYPE
     [Illustration: leaf] ART BOARDS, THREE SHILLINGS NET.

 _NOW READY_ [Illustration: leaf]

     I. IN THE VALLEY OF VISION [Illustration: leaf] BY GEOFFREY FABER,
     AUTHOR OF “INTERFLOW.”

     II. SONNETS AND POEMS [Illustration: leaf] BY ELEANOR FARJEON,
     AUTHOR OF “NURSERY RHYMES OF LONDON TOWN.”

 _IN PREPARATION_ [Illustration: leaf]

     III. THE DEFEAT OF YOUTH, AND OTHER POEMS [Illustration: leaf] BY
     ALDOUS HUXLEY, AUTHOR OF “THE BURNING WHEEL.”

     IV. SONGS FOR SALE [Illustration: leaf] AN ANTHOLOGY OF VERSE,
     EDITED BY E. B. C. JONES FROM BOOKS ISSUED RECENTLY BY B. H.
     BLACKWELL.

     V. CLOWNS’ HOUSES [Illustration: leaf] BY EDITH SITWELL, EDITOR OF
     “WHEELS.”

     THE SHELDONIAN SERIES OF REPRINTS AND RENDERINGS OF MASTERPIECES
     IN ALL LANGUAGES [Illustration: leaf] EDITED BY REGINALD HEWITT,
     M. A. [Illustration: leaf] MEDIUM 16MO, IN DOLPHIN OLD
     STYLE TYPE, RED AND BLACK, BOARDS, TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE NET.

 _FIRST THREE BOOKS_ [Illustration: leaf]

     SONGS AND SAYINGS OF WALTHER VON DER VOGELWEIDE, MINNESAENGER
     [Illustration: leaf] ENGLISHED BY FRANK BETTS.

     THE FUNERAL ORATION OF PERICLES. ENGLISHED BY THOMAS HOBBES OF
     MALMESBURY.

     BALLADES OF FRANCOIS VILLON [Illustration: leaf] INTERPRETED INTO
     ENGLISH VERSE BY PAUL HOOKHAM.

 OXFORD [Illustration: leaf] B. H. BLACKWELL, BROAD ST.

     ADVENTURERS ALL [Illustration: leaf] A SERIES OF YOUNG POETS
     UNKNOWN TO FAME [Illustration: leaf] [Illustration: leaf] UNIFORM
     VOLUMES IN DOLPHIN OLD STYLE TYPE IN ART WRAPPERS [Illustration:
     leaf] TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE NET EACH.

     ¶. “Beautiful little books ... containing poetry, real
     poetry.”--_The New Witness._

     I. THE ESCAPED PRINCESS, AND OTHER POEMS. [Illustration: leaf] By
     WILFRED ROWLAND CHILDE. [_Out of print_].

     II. THURSDAY’S CHILD. [Illustration: leaf] By ELIZABETH
     RENDALL. [_Out of print_].

     III. BOHEMIAN GLASS. [Illustration: leaf] By ESTHER LILIAN
     DUFF. [_Out of print_].

     IV. CONTACTS, AND OTHER POEMS. [Illustration: leaf] By T. W.
     EARP. [Out of print].

     V. THE IRON AGE. [Illustration: leaf] By FRANK BETTS.
     With an Introduction by GILBERT MURRAY.

     VI. THE TWO WORLDS. [Illustration: leaf] By SHERARD VINES.

     VII. THE BURNING WHEEL. [Illustration: leaf] By A. L.
     HUXLEY.

     VIII. A VAGABOND’S WALLET. [Illustration: leaf] BY STEPHEN
     REID-HEYMAN.

     IX. OP. I. By DOROTHY L. SAYERS. [Illustration: leaf]
     [_Out of print_].

     X. LYRICAL POEMS. [Illustration: leaf] By DOROTHY PLOWMAN.

     XI. THE WITCHES’ SABBATH. [Illustration: leaf] By E. H. W.
     MEYERSTEIN.

     XII. A SCALLOP SHELL OF QUIET. [Illustration: leaf] Poems by Four
     Women. Introduced by MARGARET L. WOODS.

     XIII. AT A VENTURE. [Illustration: leaf] Poems by EIGHT YOUNG
     WRITERS.

     XIV. ALDEBARAN. [Illustration: leaf] By M. ST. CLARE
     BYRNE.

     XV. LIADAIN AND CURITHIR. [Illustration: leaf] By MOIREEN
     FOX.

     XVI. LINNETS IN THE SLUMS. [Illustration: leaf] By MARION
     PRYCE.

     XVII. OUT OF THE EAST. [Illustration: leaf] By VERA and
     MARGARET LARMINIE.

     XVIII. DUNCH. [Illustration: leaf] By SUSAN MILES.

     XIX. DEMETER AND OTHER POEMS. [Illustration: leaf] By ELEANOR
     HILL.

 _FORTHCOMING_ [Illustration: leaf]

     XX. CARGO. [Illustration: leaf] By S. B. GATES.

     XXI. DREAMS AND JOURNEYS. [Illustration: leaf] By FREDEGOND
     SHOVE.

     XXII. THE PEOPLE’S PALACE. [Illustration: leaf] By SACHEVERELL
     SITWELL.


 OXFORD [Illustration: leaf] B. H. BLACKWELL, BROAD STREET





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets and Poems, by Eleanor Farjeon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS AND POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 56244-0.txt or 56244-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/4/56244/

Produced by Chuck Greif, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
